docs(testing): create github workflow taxonomy (#3517)
chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal: .github/workflows/README.md

# Workflow Taxonomy

## Where and what tests are run

---

### Workflow: `deploy-happy-stack.yml`

#### Ran on:

- `deployment`: (deployments are triggered by `push-tests`)

#### Jobs:

> - ##### `upgrade`: TODO

Reviewer: Mind opening an issue to fill out these remaining job steps and link it in the Improve Testing Confidence Documentation epic?

# Workflow Taxonomy

> ## Where and what tests are run

Author: Is this document straight forward on how to skim? I tried to drill down as far as it made sense to and expose what was actually being called by these workflows.

Reviewer 2: it's pretty straight forward to skim 🎉  Thanks for doing this 😄 

I guess my only concern is that if any of the code implementation changes, we'd need to update the docs as well, so we'd sort of have two sources of truth. But I don't think this part of code changes often, so probably not a huge concern?

Reviewer: I have a similar concern; while nice to have the code snippets near the docs, I actually think it'd be easier to maintain and similarly clear if we replaced code snippets with descriptions of what each type of test is meant to accomplish and whether it's run in a deployed env vs. a container

Author: Do these GH code snippets work in GH markdown? Is that a good middle ground, if so?

---

### Workflow: `deploy-happy-stack.yml`

#### Ran on:

- `deployment`: (deployments are triggered by `push-tests`)

#### Jobs:

- ##### `upgrade`: TODO
- ##### `e2e-test`:
  - Runs playwright against deployed frontend app uploading any artifacts
    - ```bash
            if [ "${DEPLOYMENT_STAGE}" == "stage" ]; then
            export DEPLOYMENT_STAGE=staging
          fi
          if [ "${DEPLOYMENT_STAGE}" != "prod" ]; then
            pip3 install -r scripts/smoke_tests/requirements.txt
            python3 -m scripts.smoke_tests.setup
          fi
          cd frontend
          npm ci
          npx playwright install --with-deps

>           cp src/configs/${DEPLOYMENT_STAGE}.js src/configs/configs.js

Author: In what case is this config necessary?

Reviewer: src/configs/configs.js defines which backend API base URL to use for any backend calls (local vs. a deployed env) + a set-up config for plausible analytics

Author: but the frontend is never started, so there's no reading of the config? @nayib-jose-gloria @tihuan

Reviewer: I believe its playwright uses it as well for certain tests, at least the API_URL

Reviewer: we can probably refactor that so it isn't the case, but as-is we'd need to change a few things

Reviewer 2: Ah test URL is configured through `TEST_ENV`, so it doesn't use `API_URL` I think!

```ts
const TEST_ENV_TO_TEST_URL = {
  dev: "https://cellxgene.dev.single-cell.czi.technology",
  happy: "http://frontend.corporanet.local:3000",
  local: "http://localhost:3000",
  localProd: "http://localhost:9000",
  prod: "https://cellxgene.cziscience.com",
  rdev: process.env.RDEV_LINK || "",
  staging: "https://cellxgene.staging.single-cell.czi.technology",
};
```

Reviewer: here's one example: https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/d5c6377d407957db32e82bf5152cea943680d02b/frontend/tests/features/collection/collection.test.ts#L4

Reviewer: those TEST_ENV_TO_TEST_URL values also aren't the base URLs you'd use to wait for a response from a particular backend API endpoint, which is how we fixed the flakey invalid DOI tests

Reviewer 2: Ahh I see! Sorry totally missed that!

What if we remove `API_URL` import in tests and update the assertion to be:

```ts
const collectionEndpointPath = `dp/v1/collections`; // <-- removed API_URL

/**
 * Submit create invalid collection form.
 * @returns Form submit invalid parameters error response (400).
 */
async function submitCreateFormInvalid(page: Page) {
  return await Promise.all([
    page.waitForResponse(
      (response) =>
        response.url().includes(collectionEndpointPath) &&  // <-- update to match partial path
        response.status() === HTTP_STATUS_CODE.BAD_REQUEST
    ),
    page.click(getTestID("create-button")),
  ]);
}
```

Reviewer 2: If that looks good I can add the change in this PR!

https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/pull/3516

Reviewer: yeah, that looks good to me!

Reviewer 2: Awesome! Since that PR is now merged, I'll create a separate PR to address that today 👍 Thank you!

Reviewer 2: PR out! https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/pull/3531 PTAL thank you 🙏

          DEBUG=pw:api npm run e2e-${DEPLOYMENT_STAGE}
      ```
- ##### `functional-test`:

>   - If environment is not `prod` start up backend container and run `make local-functional-test`

Author: Am I crazy or does this not actually run in the container that's started up? https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/ee3e590bab9fb77fd814c28df8a13fc4d38b1c83/.github/workflows/deploy-happy-stack.yml#L218-L219

Reviewer: It does, the make command does some set-up and runs the actual tests in the docker container. 

I do wonder what the point of running this post-deploy is if it's being run against a docker container anyway, though...

Author: ah I misread the Dockerfile, was looking at the wrong target

Reviewer 2: Huh yeah, could have been a copy/paste error. Probably should run functional test against the deployed BE 😆 Great catch!

Reviewer: Might be good to include that implementation detail here for clarity

Reviewer 2: Ah interesting! Would it make sense to drop `local-` in `local-functional-test`?

Reviewer: Yeah, that's probably appropriate

Author: I'm not actually sure if dropping local here makes sense, since it runs the test in “local dev” based on the happy team's definition

Reviewer: yeah I think I've changed my mind on this, ultimately we can obscure details like that as long as we do a good job illustrating the point here

- ##### `performance-test`:
  - If environment is `prod` run `make prod-performance-test`
  - `make prod-performance-test` -> `python3 -m unittest discover --start-directory tests/performance --top-level-directory . --verbose`

### Workflow: `lint-pr.yml`

#### Ran on:

- `pull_request_target`

  - opening, editing, and syncing a pull request

  #### Summary: Runs a GitHub action that lints the PR commit message

### Workflow: `push-processing-base.yml`

TODO

### Workflow: `push-rdev.yml`

TODO

### Workflow: `push-tests.yml`

#### Ran on:

- `push` to `main`, `staging`, `prod`
- `pull_request` targeting `"*"`

#### Jobs:

- ##### `lint`:

  - Inside backend container: `make lint` -> `flake8 backend tests`
  - Inside frontend container: (frontend/Makefile)`make lint` -> `npm run prettier-check & npm run lint`
    - `npm run prettier-check` -> `prettier --check .`
    - `npm run lint` -> `concurrently \"node_modules/.bin/next lint\" \"node_modules/.bin/stylelint --fix '**/*.{js,ts,tsx,css}'\" \"npm run type-check\"`
      - `node_modules/.bin/next lint` -> runs eslint with config [next.js docs](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/eslint)

>       - `node_modules/.bin/stylelint --fix '**/*.{js,ts,tsx,css}'` -> runs stylelint with config

Author: Isn't running this with `--fix` dangerous? We don't actually want to fix the lint failures in this workflow. Just return lint errors

Reviewer 2: Hmm great point! Maybe we should remove `--fix` here and add `--fix` to both `next lint` and `stylelint` in `npm run format`?

Thanks for catching this!

Author: That makes sense to me!

      - `npm run type-check` -> `tsc --noEmit`

- ##### `e2e-test`:

>   - Installs dependencies and runs frontend server pointing at dev deployment:

Reviewer 2: nit: since we have FE and BE servers, maybe the following will be more explicit?

```suggestion
  - Installs dependencies and runs frontend server pointing at dev env BE API:
```

>   - Installs dependencies and runs frontend server pointing at dev env BE API:

Reviewer: nit: mind adding 'local' frontend server? just for easy cross-reference to the TEST_ENV table in the tests readme

Author: ```suggestion
  - Installs dependencies and runs local frontend server pointing at dev env BE API:
```

    - `npm ci &&npx playwright install --with-deps && cp src/configs/dev.js src/configs/configs.js && npm run dev&`
  - Runs e2e tests:
    - `npm run e2e` ->`playwright test`
      - runs all tests in `frontend/tests` using playwright config, no TEST_ENV provided defaults to `local`

>   - Pushes images to RCS

Author: Why push images as part of the e2e-test step? Seems like an overextension.

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that Infra helped us set up this way, so we only push images that pass the tests. And thus actual deployment will be shorter since the images will already be available in ECS (instead of pushing images at deployment time)

Author: This should probably be brought up to a larger visibility for the team: 

I think we can still push images in this workflow, but made it a separate run that relies on a positive e2e test run. Wouldn't that still meet that same functionality while allowing e2e tests to run quicker and potentially fail quicker?

Ideally, we'd refactor/shrink these workflow jobs to contain only the context and operations relative to a single operation (lint, functional test, smoke test, build, push, etc.)

Reviewer 2: You mean updating the `if` in the `Push images` block to only push images when e2e tests succeed?

```
- name: Push images
        // Add extra condition to only push when success?
        if: (github.ref == 'refs/heads/main' || github.ref == 'refs/heads/staging' || github.ref == 'refs/heads/prod' ) 
        run: |
          echo "HAPPY_COMMIT=$(git rev-parse --verify HEAD)" >> envfile
          echo "HAPPY_BRANCH=$(git branch --show-current)" >> envfile
          happy push --docker-compose-env-file envfile --aws-profile "" --tag sha-${GITHUB_SHA:0:8} frontend backend
```

Author: it would be pulling Push images out of the `e2e-test` job and into its own job with a shape similar to:

```
push-happy-backend-frontend
    needs:
      - backend-unit-test
      - e2e-test
    runs-on: ubuntu-20.04
    if: (github.ref == 'refs/heads/main' || github.ref == 'refs/heads/staging' || github.ref == 'refs/heads/prod' )
    steps:
      ...
      - name: Push images
        run: |
          echo "HAPPY_COMMIT=$(git rev-parse --verify HEAD)" >> envfile
          echo "HAPPY_BRANCH=$(git branch --show-current)" >> envfile
          happy push --docker-compose-env-file envfile --aws-profile "" --tag sha-${GITHUB_SHA:0:8} frontend backend
       ...
```

While writing this out, I noticed that we're also pushing the backend image here.

- ##### `backend-unit-test`:

  - Checks if containers need to be rebuilt based on diffs on docker + requirements files
  - Runs tests in docker-compose: https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/6a423183c255737d2a44e40447a91d0ece041a41/.github/workflows/push-tests.yml#L214-L216
    - https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/6a423183c255737d2a44e40447a91d0ece041a41/Makefile#L106-L107
    - https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/6a423183c255737d2a44e40447a91d0ece041a41/Makefile#L182-L185
      - https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-data-portal/blob/6a423183c255737d2a44e40447a91d0ece041a41/Makefile#L27-L30

> - ##### `processing-unit-test`:

Reviewer: I think one-liner descriptions for all the test types like 'Sets up docker container to run through a dataset submission job and validates behavior" would be helpful
